Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Career1:Working through University|T-Career2:Post Office Telecommunications|T-Career3:Leaving British Telecom|T-Career4:CD-Interactive|T-Technology:The Geek's Progress|T-Career5:Audix Broadcast|T-Technology:The Geek's Progress|T-Funerals:Funerals~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Funerals:Funerals~

## 'Proper' computing jobs

At the time I parted company with Audix it was 2003 and I was 55 years old. Getting another job was never going to be easy and my experience had been solely on the fringes of software engineering, never in a 'proper' programming team. 

Nevertheless, in the winter of 2003 I landed my first contract - 3 months at a firm in Cambridge called LaserScan. The odd thing is, I can't remember what the company's product was, even though I spent every day writing software for it. I've even looked them up on Google but nothing rings any bells. This is one of the curious aspects of being a programmer; you're often so far into the wood that all you can see is trees.

For the 3 months following the LaserScan contract I was unemployed, for the first time in my life. I confess I didn't take it well, falling close to depression. I spent hours each day scouring the job adverts and I had to sign on at the local Job Centre, itself not a place that inspired confidence. There seemed to be nothing I was suitably qualified for.

Then in August 2004 I responded to an advert for a 3-week contract in Belgium. The US data warehousing company EMC, later bought by Dell, had an engineering office in the town of Mechelen where they were bulding some data visualisation software. They were running late for a demo that requied a PowerPoint presentation to be converted to 'proper' code and they were looking for two Java programmers to do the job. I was hired, along with a very amicable Swiss guy called Frank van Orshoven, who slightly resembled Sylvester Stallone. Together we did the recoding job inside the deadline; an impressive achievement.

While I was in Belgium two jobs appeared back in the UK. One was near Milton Keynes, the other in Histon, just outside Cambridge. I had interviews lined up for both but the Histon one happened first. Since Histon was commutable from Wymondham, where I was living at the time, I accepted that job offer and declined to go to the Milton Keynes interview. The company was De Novo Pharmaceuticals, a spin-off from Cambridge University. Their work was in using mathematical models to identify molecules that would interact with proteins in such as way as to be possible candidates for new drugs, and my role was in providing an easy-to-use visual interface to the very complex maths going on behind.

When I had been at De Novo for only a couple of months I had a call from the manager at EMC in Belgium, asking me if I'd like to rejoin the company on a full-time basis. It's interesting - but futile - to speculate on what might have been if they'd made that request before I finished my contract there. I'd probably have accepted, and life may well have turned out very differently.

I commuted to Histon for about a year, but adding 2 hours or more to each working day was never satisfactory so we decided to sell up and rent near Histon.Frances had never really liked the bungalow in Wymondham and Histon was closer to her daughters in Suffolk, so it was a fairly easy decision. I can't remember when we moved; it was probably some time in 2002, to a rather sprawling bungalow in Rampton. From there I could cycle to work; a great improvement over the long drive.

The Histon job lasted for another couple of years but the company was in financial difficulties, being largely venture capital funded and without a strong product to sell. Eventually the crunch came. During that time I had become keen on moving to Italy, partly because I like the country and partly because property prices were much lower. On a holiday in the spring of 2006 we discovered a house we both loved immediately, and put into motion the process of buying it. A month later I was made redundant, with just over 18 months to go before reaching my retirement age of 60. Our plans changed from having a holday home to becoming ex-pats in Italy, and in September 2006 we packed everything up and moved. Looking back now it was a crazy decision, with no income other than profit from investments.

Things didn't go very well for us. Frances never really came to terms with living in another country and made no attempt to assimilate, so we lurched along, gradually drawing apart. A year later, with the financial crisis looming, our relationship ended abruptly when I started to become friendly with Anna, both of us in unsatisfactory marriages. To cut a rather long and painful story short, I moved out, we put the house up for sale again and Frances moved back to England.

By 2011 Anna and I were now living in ~tid:Torri:Torri~ and our financial situation was becoming critical. I started to look for jobs again, and to my surprise passed an interview for a job with LloydsPharmacy, at their head office in Coventry, where I joined a team building and maintaining the software that ran the dispensing system in their pharmacies. My pay from Lloyds just about covered the mortgage on the house in Torri, Anna's mortgage for her house in Semoigo that her husband had defaulted on and the rent for my flat in Coventry, so we survived. During that time the legal procedure we'd taken out in Italy to recover her house came to its conclusion, we sold the Torri house and my mother died leaving me a useful inheritance, so at the end of 2013 I left Coventry and returned to Italy.

Once again, income was never quite up to the demands on it, so we drifted steadily downwards, but in April 2016 I received a message from the guy who had interviewed me for the Coventry job, asking if I was still available for work. I went for an interview, passed it and in August started work again. This time it was for Click Travel, a Birmingham-based travel management company many of whose programmers mostly worked from home. This was an arrangement that suited me of course - I was pleased enough to be still able to hold down a job at the age of 68 - and it paid enough for us to make substantial improvements around the house.

Things went wrong at the start of 2017, though. Anna had a bout of flu and although I appeared not to have caught it I suddenly lost a good proportion of my hearing. This had a serious effect on my ability to keep up with the daily video meetings, as I couldn't hear much of what was being said. My performance steadily suffered, until the end of 2017 when I was contributing little of any value. In February 2018 I was sacked, just before my 70th birthday. Other factors were conspiring to drive us back to England; I was unable to transfer my UK driving license to Italy, Anna's mother in Leeds was in declining health and the Brexit vote had happened and was going to make life harder for ex-pats. So my career as a programmer ended at that point. Over the next couple of years I lost interest in keeping up with the ever-increasing demands of the technology, so the timing was in fact about right. And then in 2020 I fell into a new career thanks to Covid-19. But that's the story for the next page.

Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Career1:Working through University|T-Career2:Post Office Telecommunications|T-Career3:Leaving British Telecom|T-Career4:CD-Interactive|T-Technology:The Geek's Progress|T-Career5:Audix Broadcast|T-Technology:The Geek's Progress|T-Funerals:Funerals~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Funerals:Funerals~
