Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|S-Joan:Mum|SRonald:Dad|T-Pre-school:My early years|T-Kent:The move to Kent|T-Grammar school:Grammar school|T-University:University|T-Career1:Work and Careers|T-Holidays:Holidays|T-Music:Favourite music|T-Films:Favourite films|T-Miscellany:Miscellany|T-Technology:The Geek's Progress~~space:3~Next:

## The Funeral business

In early 2020 it was becoming obvious that my days as a professional computer programmer were past. I no longer had the stamina to keep up all day, every day, and I had a growing conviction that things were being done entirely the wrong way - see ~tid:EasyCoder:EasyCoder~ - that was completely at odds with the way everyone else worked. On top of which, there are few opportunities for computer programmers of my age, so all I had left was hobby work. Given the lack of interaction this implies, I was becoming increasingly idle.

So at Anna's suggestion I applied to be a casual funeral operative with one of the local companies and was accepted into the team. The work involved cleaning and driving the hearse, limousine and ambulance, cleaning the same, bearing at funerals, helping in the morgue and being on the on-call rota to recover deceased people from private or care homes to take them to the morgue.

A couple of months later the Covid-19 pandemic struck. As an over-70 I was classed as vulnerable and laid off for the next 6 months. The occasional driving or bearing job came in from other companies but I was essentially out of work. Anna continued her work as a funeral celebrant while I went back to tinkering with software. At the same time, restrictions were placed on the number of mourners permitted to attend a funeral, causing considerable distress to families who had lost a loved one. With our background in making video interviews on the Riviera, Anna suggested we could record services on behalf of the family, and from these beginnings a new business soon developed.

In the 12 months or so from then to the time of writing this page (May 2021) we have recorded over 70 services. At the end of 2020 we added live streaming, so now we stream and record at the same time. After the service I create an edited version of the recorded video, with music tracks from YouTube or Amazon dubbed over the usually very poor quality sound picked up by the microphone. We use 2 or 3 cameras and cut between them to give a better view of the service. We record in 4k high definition and edit down to 720p, which allows us to digitally zoom up to about 3 times to focus either on a speaker or or on the general view, as appropriate. We ask families to supply us with a couple of dozen photographs and add these as a slide-show during the "reflection" music usually played in the middle of the service. Where a speaker - who is often a family member - reads a passage we often display this in a scrolling panel on one side of the screen.

We usually finish a video within 2 days of the service, and our rates are below what is normally charged just for live streaming. Our aim is to supply a product that will be kept as part of a family's history, as a tribute to the departed one, telling a story that is not available anywhere else. Not surprisingly - to us at least - we often receive effusive thanks for the job we have done. It's very gratifying to be able to bring comfort and cheer to those in need of it, and to be paid moderately well for doing it is an added bonus. It's odd that something which only a year or two earlier was regarded by many as 'tacky' is now completely accepted and even demanded. Indeed, some of our most enthusiastic clients are priests and ministers in local churches; we even had a commission recently at St Anne's Cathedral in the centre of Leeds.

The future is of course unknown. If and when Covid becomes a thing of the past our business may well dry up. On the other hand, remotely attending a funeral may well retain enough demand to keep us in business indefinitely. Who can say.

Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|S-Joan:Mum|SRonald:Dad|T-Pre-school:My early years|T-Kent:The move to Kent|T-Grammar school:Grammar school|T-University:University|T-Career1:Work and Careers|T-Holidays:Holidays|T-Music:Favourite music|T-Films:Favourite films|T-Miscellany:Miscellany|T-Technology:The Geek's Progress~~space:3~Next:
