Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Italy3:Torri~

# Ventimiglia

On September 15 2007 I had to move out after admitting having feelings for Anna. We weren't actually having an "affair" at the time but I was running out of patience with Frances' continuing refusal to commit to life in Italy. With few people to talk to I'd confided in Daz, an english handyman/builder who had been working at our house on various building jobs, and also with Anna, who lived nearby. The latter relationship was steering perilously close to danger and when I incautiously admitted how I felt the result was explosive. Anna's husband threatened violence so we both moved out. After a week or two of cheap hotels and a holiday cottage we were able to rent an apartment just off the sea front in Ventimiglia, where we stayed for about 5 months.

The flat was on the 3rd floor and overlooked the park, with a walk of about 5 minutes to the station. Anna travelled every day to her job in Antibes; mostly by train except when the all-too frequent French strikes disrupted service. I spent my days tinkering with our new website, The Riviera Woman, handicapped by mostly non-existent Internet access. I would have to go back up to the house at Pian del Soglio, partly to let Frances have the car for a few days, and use the Internet connection there to upload whatever additions I'd made to the site.

Living by the Mediterranean seems like an ideal, but it isn't always that way. Winters may not be freezing but it can still get quite chilly. The flat didn't get any sun until half-way through the day then much of it was blocked by the tall palm trees in the park opposite. Electric heating was ruinously expensive so we invested in the first of our paraffin stoves, which though occasionally smelly were a fairly economical source of heating.

The building was on one of the roads used by the Ventimiglai Friday open-air market. Every Thursday evening we had to move our cars somewhere else, usually at least ten minutes away on foot, then on Friday evenings get them back before all the local parking spaces had filled.

Much of our time there is now a blur to me. We had a lot on our minds regarding our future, which often appeared quite bleak, especially when Anna lost her most reliable employment. Her husband David had a mission to bring us down and would discover where she worked then phone the company continuously with nuisance calls until they lost patience and laid her off. He also kept up a campaign of misinformation on the local Internet forum, partly to put us down and partly to gather victims for the many scams he operated.

One highlight was Christmas Eve, 2007. Late in the evening we'd gone out for a walk, stopping off at the main church to hear the Christmas service then walking to the beach, which was deserted. On a bench there sat a panettone, still in its box, with no sign of its owner. This must have been a sign of some kind but we'll never know what.

Another higlight came when one day I saw a person deposit a pile of crockery next to the communal refuse bin below our window. It had presumably been cast off by one of the bars below us. I went down and retrieved it, and on examination it turned out to be of the highest quality. Why they would throw such stuff away I cannot imagine. We still have the crockery, keeping it "for best".

Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Italy3:Torri~
