Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Leeds1:Chapel Allerton~

# Semoigo

In the spring of 2012 I became half-owner of the house at Semoigo, while still working in Coventry. Anna's husband was still occupying the Semoigo house but living under the radar, unknown to the authorities who would soon be pursuing him for payment of the court judgement against him. Anna remained in Torri for that summer, then in September 2012 we were contacted by another past acquaintance, an old friend of Anna's from England who was also owed a considerable sum of money by Anna's husband. We arranged for the friend to visit us and stay nearby, and on September 14 we all went up to Semoigo. The house was barred and apparently empty but we knew full well Anna's husband was inside, so we loudly suggested we would be back the following day with the police, then left.

When we returned the following day there was no sign of occupancy, so we let ourselves in. The house was in a dreadful state of uncleanliness, looking as though occupied by a tramp, and the garden was in a similar state having been neglected for years. We cleared all the personal belongings we could find into plastic sacks and left them outside. I remained at the house for a couple of hours while the others went out to buy padlocks and chains. While they were out, Anna's husband appeared. We had a brief confrontation then he picked up a couple of sacks and went off on foot. Over the next 6 months or so there were occasional unconfirmed sightings but since then he has vanished completely. It comes as no surprise that he did not choose to complain to the authorities about his treatment, since his record was always of one who was openly contemptuous of any such dealings and who frequently used false names to hide his identity.

~img:semoigo-garage-junk.jpg:left 48%~ ~img:semoigo-garden-junk.jpg:left 48%~ ~img:semoigo-terrace-junk.jpg:right 48%~ ~img:semoigo-table-junk.jpg:right 48%~

For the next few months Anna remained at Torri but visited the Semoigo house regularly to clean and prepare for us to move back in. On most occasions she would ask friends to accompany her, for her own safety in case her husband were minded to seek revenge for being evicted.

On the sale of the Torri apartment in June 2013, Anna had nowhere to go but Semoigo. By then I had changed all the locks and installed a multiple-camera security system to record any movement outside the house. She then moved in and I went back to work in Coventry. The next few months were hard for her as there was always the fear that he might return with evil intent, so I decided to terminate work in Coventry at the end of the year, as much as for her safety as anything else. On December 20th 2013 I left Coventry and returned to Italy to begin the next stage of our life together.

Although our monthly ougtgoings were greatly reduced from what had previously been, we still had no regular source of income sufficient to meet our needs. There was a risk my Mum's inheritance would dribble away on daily living, so we hatched bold plan to improve the house. The original owner had constructed it as a 1-bedroom house because he didn't want anyone staying over. The house is on a steep hillside with 2 floors, the main entrance being on the upper floor. The living room, bedroom and bathroom were on that level and below was a kitchen and dining room that opened onto a large terrace. Our plan was to build an extension on the lower level, with a roof terrace accessed from the upper. The extension would comprise a master bedroom and en-suite bathroom, the existing kitchen would become a bedroom, the dining room would become a third bedroom and the upstairs bedroom would become the kitchen.

We engaged a local builder whose wife was the sister of some close friends in the next village, but this turned out to be a mistake. Work was of poor quality and proceeded very slowly, and it was quite evident that he wouldn't keep to the original quoted price, so we dismissed him and looked for another builder. This time we struck lucky with a locally-based Neapolitan artisan, who finished the work in record time and kept to his quoted price. We now had a house to be proud of.

However, funds were still an issue. Then one day in April 2016 I was contacted by the same person who had recruited me to work in Coventry, asking me if I was still interested in work. At the age of 68 this was both surprising and most welcome. The company was in Birmingham but most of the programmers worked remotely from home, including one in Romania and another in Spain, so it didn't really matter that I was in Italy. The pay was good and the hours flexible. We now had enough to hire a gardener to do the jobs I would otherwise be doing, and much more besides, so the garden started to be transformed and we were able to build up a modest fund again.

Then in January 2017 Anna went down with flu for a couple of weeks. I was initially unafffected but it then hit me in an unexpected way, causing a sudden partial loss of hearing. At first I thought this was just blocked Eustachian tubes; this was in fact a contributory factor that has continued ever since, but underlying it was an actual loss of high-frequency hearing. This normally happens gradually over a period of years and is barely noticeable for most of that time, but when it happens suddenly it is quite distressing. Over the next few months, while I expected it to clear up, my working performance started to deteriorate. Every morning there was an online video meeting and I was having difficulty hearing what the others were saying. In a few months I was making far more mistakes than before, however hard I tried. Eventuall, in February 2080, just before my 70th birthday, I was abruptly dismissed.

Two other factors then came strongly into play. One was that I'd applied to transfer my driving license to Italy. This was something I should have done years before, but the main problem was I left it too close to the expiry date of my British license. By the time the Italian system had got round to dealing with it my license was out of date and couldn't be transferred. I couldn't get a new UK license legally because I was resident in Italy, and I couldn't get an Italian license because it meant months if not years of study and fluency in Italian. They don't give out driving licenses with packets of cornflakes in Italy. So in March 2018 I suddenly because a non-driver, stuck 4km outside a mountain village with only 3 buses a day.

The other factor was that the sight and hearing of Anna's mother were on the decline. She lived by herself and was beginning to find it difficult to deal with everyday matters. Of her 3 daughters and 1 son, none were in a ready position to move in and help her. So given my hearing problems, the lack of a driving license, no job and a mother needing help, we decided to sell up in Italy and move back to England. It took us until July to get everything organised, including getting passports for 2 cats and a dog, building a cat house suitable for a 2-day trip in the rear of the car and getting the house ready both for sale and for being left for long periods at a time. On July 15th we set off, loaded to the roof with a box on top.

~img:semoigo-mobile-cat-house-1.jpg:left 31%~ ~img:semoigo-mobile-cat-house-2.jpg:left 31%~ ~img:semoigo-car-with-roofbox.jpg:right 31%~

I was very proud of the cat house. It had two storeys with a hole between them the cats could climb through. The top level was high enough they could see out of the car rear window, and below were two bedrooms, in the middle a feeding area and on the right a cat toilet with a sliding door so we could empty the tray inside without either of them escaping. The top lifted off and the base was in 2 parts. Because it was wider than the rear door opening you had to lower the right-hand seat by reaching through a hole at the back of the toilet compartment to get to the release pull, then the right-hand part could be rolled forwards leaving room for the left part to slide across for removal. Definitely an engineer's solution to a problem. Still we had no complaints from the occupants on that journey of some 900 miles.

Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Leeds1:Chapel Allerton~
