Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Italy4:Semoigo~

# Torri

After the autumn of 2007 things were looking precarious for us and we decided to look for somewhere more permanent to live. At the time, rental properties were scarce and mostly very expensive. It was not unusual to find no kitchen or bathroom fittings, just wires and pipes sticking out of walls, so a major expense would have to be incurred even before moving in. We also looked at properties to buy, but again choice was limited. Then in February 2008 we discovered a third-floor village house for sale in Torri, about 5km inland from Ventimiglia.

~img:torri.jpg:left 48%~ ~img:torri-from-above.jpg:right 48%~

~clear~Torri is a strange place, a throwback to an earlier era. It lies at the end of a road going out along the Bevera valley towards the mountains. Beyond Torri, which lies at only 80m above sea level, there are only tracks rising steeply into the hills. The village is typically Ligurian, with a dense mass of interconnected stone houses and _carruggi_ - passageways - running between them for access.

The building we lived in was slightly untypical. Although a stone house, it stands by itself on the edge of the main village, adjacent to the bridge crossing the Bevera river. There are about 4 separate residences; ours was on the third and top floors. Recently modernised, it comprised a living/dining/kitchen area, a main bedroom and a smaller bedroom. Our bedroom had a balcony that directly overlooked the small village piazza, with just enough space for a couple of chairs. The smaller bedroom had a balcony that had been closed in, with a tiny WC behind a door at one end. A spiral iron staircase led to the top floor, with a bathroom and access to the roof terrace. Frankly, it was this that made the apartment superior to so many other ones, and I guess the price reflected. Even so, I think we paid well over the odds for the place.

~img:torri-cucina3.jpg:left 23%~ ~img:torri-living-room.jpg:left 23%~ ~img:torri-camera.jpg:right 23%~ ~img:torri-bagno.jpg:right 23%~

~clear~The apartment itself was actually fairly comfortable if you ignored the winding stone staircase to get to it. Somewhat harder to ignore were the bells from the church right next door, which rang out on the hour, quarter, half and three-quarters, day and night. And if that were not enough, the main chimes were repeated a couple of minutes later, just in case people out on the hills hadn't heard them the first time. Sleep was never easy, at least not before midnight.

~img:torri-terrace.jpg:center 75%~

The village had a population of a couple of hundred, which was augmented by perhaps a similar number of summer visitors. Most of the permanent residents were elderly, lived there all their lives and had never really engaged with the modern world. Every afternoon a group of middle-aged to elderly ladies would gather in the piazza to gossip. It was never clear what the source of income was for most of them, though one or two were believed to be well-provided for by deceased husbands. None ever appeared to be short of funds, but they all firmly believed that because we were English we must be millionaires. This view was confirmed by the fact that we rarely came out except to get in our car and drive off, obviously to collect more money.

It's fair to say we never really engaged with any of the permanent residents. The only person we had regular dealings with was Guy Pallanca, who owned the apartment opposite. In spite of his Italian surname Guy was in fact French, a retired helicopter engineer who lived in Lyon and came to Torri every summer. Although then in his sixties he put everyone else to shame with his boundless energy and enthusiasm. When not rebuilding his apartment (while ignoring all planning regulations) he would be out in the hills, planting olive trees or maintaining a large "orto" (vegetable garden) on the edge of the village. Wherever there was work to be done, Guy would appear. In fact, it could be quite embarrassing as it was almost impossible to return the many favours.

Although Guy was passionate about his Italian heritage, his wife Noelle was less keen. As each year went by she became less and less willing to spend the entire summer cooped up in a village apartment while Guy was out having fun. It's been 10 years and more since we left Torri and we're rather lost touch; I sometimes wonder what became of them and their efforts.

Torri was not without its more interesting moments. The local council tries hard to bring events to the village. Every year, a huge motorcycle club based over the French border in Roquebrune held a rally which used Torri as the place to stop for lunch. The piazza filled with hundreds of bikes of all kinds. A veteran sports car rally did much the same on another weekend, when it became impossible to get in or out. This didn't matter too much to us as we had ringside seats right above. There were also events of a cultural nature, most often conducted in dialect, which to one not yet having got to grips with Italian was a step too far.

~img:torri-bikes.jpg:left 48%~ ~img:torri-piazza-chairs.jpg:right 48%~

~clear~Immediately south of Torri is a small mountain, and our building is tucked right up against the base of it. This unfortunately means that from mid November to early February the sun doesn't rise high enough to reach our terrace. We still got 3 hours of sunshine every day, mostly though the kitchen window, but none on the terrace. On February 8th every year we celebrated the sun just skimming the top of the mountain and our daily ration of sunshine went from 3 to 7 hours; even more in mid-summer. This date we eagerly awaited each year.

We lived in Torri from 2008 until 2013 and spent the last 3 years of that period trying to sell the place. We eventually had to settle for quite a lot less than we paid for it, but then everything happened at once. As well as selling the apartment, since 2009 we had been pursuing a legal case through the Italian courts against Anna's husband, who had emptied their joint bank accounts of several tens of thousands of pounds then occupied their jointly-owned house in Apricale when she left in 2007, all the while conducting an online and telephone campaign aimed at destroying us and our business affairs. Some time in late 2010 he stopped paying the mortgage, and to avoid having the house reposessed I took over the payments. This was a considerable burden but in mid 2011 I landed a job in England so I was just able to afford the mortgage on the Torri apartment, the payments for the Apricale house and the rent in Coventry where I was working. It was a pretty close thing, though. Anna remained in Torri between 2011 and 2012 and we travelled back and forth as often as finance and my annual leave would allow.

In 2011 the legal proceedings came to a close with a judgement against Anna's husband, requiring him to restitute the stolen funds. He promptly disappeared, without even paying his own lawyer, and has not been seen or heard of since. The court ordered half the house to be put up for sale and for the missing funds to be recovered from his share. This may sound bizarre, and it is indeed pretty unworkable as nobody will buy half a house unless it can be physically divided, which was not the case here. The system works by holding a series of offers, with sealed bids for the asking price or more. Each time there is no taker another sale is set up with the price reduced by 25%, until a bid is made, a process than can take several years as there's a gap of up to 6 months between the stages.

To make things more complicated, we formed the strong suspicion that our own lawyer, who was encouraging us to wait until the asking price was very low, was intending to buy the half and then force Anna out by making it impossible for her to manage financially. We responded by not telling him our intention to put in a bid on the second round, for which I had just enough in my remaining funds. We also stopped cooperating with his demands for further legal actions against Anna's husband (which we regarded as futile) and disengaged his services early in 2012. In the April of that year the second phase of the auction came around; I put in what turned out to be the only bid and became half owner of the house. My money went to paying of half the mortgage (and the inflated bill of the lawyer handling the sale), leaving a far more manageable monthly sum.

Then in June 2012 two things happened at once. First we found a buyer for the Torri apartment, then just as we we planning to move to Apricale my mother, who had been in failing health, died and left me a sizeable inheritance. Not enough to live on for long but enough to pursue a number of other plans. I travelled to Scotland for Mum's funeral, to Italy to help Anna with the move then finally to Coventry to resume work. And that pretty well closes the Torri story.

Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Italy4:Semoigo~
