Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Cambridge:Cambridge~

# Wymondham

Wymondham - pronounced "windam" - is a pleasant market town about 10 miles south of Norwich, on the A11. Frances and I moved there in 2002, having sold the house in North Walsham. We bought a bungalow on the edge of the town centre, a walking distance of about 5 minutes. The place was in need of modernisation and at the start reeked of tobacco smoke (which had evidently caused the premature deaths of the celderly couple who previously owned it). Over the next year we transformed it, constructing a new kitchen and bathroom inside, adding a sunroom and timber deck to the outside and reshaping the garden.

For some reason, Frances never really fully engaged with the property, picking on small annoyances such as people parking their cars outside on the school run and the advanced ages of most of the neighbours. The latter is a problem that naturally cures itself, of course, but she evidently didn't want to wait for that to happen.

Over the next year my work became more precarious and in 2004 it dried up completely when I fell out with Audix Broadcast after a disastrous working trip to China the year before. At the end of 2003 I picked up a 3-month contract in Histon, Cambridge, but after that there was nothing. This was the first time in my life I'd been unemployed and it hit me badly for about 3 months that spring. Then suddenly in mid August 2004 I was offered a 3-week contract in Mechelen, Belgium to help complete some demonstration software that was running late, along with a Swiss guy who had also been recruited for the same period.~img:Atomium.jpg:right 25%~ It proved to be challenging but I thorougly enjoyed it and in my limited time there was even able to see something of Belgium, taking a trip out one day to visit the Ardennes and another to sample Brussels and in particular the Atomium (photo).

At the same time, 2 other opportunities arose here in England and on my return from Belgium I had a choice of employment. One was somewhere near Milton Keynes; the other was in Histon again. I picked the latter as I already knew I could commute there. The company was De Novo Pharmaceuticals, a small research outfit with University connections that was using computer modelling to try to discover new drugs. This is highly mathematical and I was brought in to help with the visualisation software that would make the software usable.

A couple of weeks after joining I had a call from the company in Belgium to ask me if I'd like to return as a permanent employee. I often wonder where life might have taken me if I hadn't already found a job.

When I started with De Novo Pharmaceuticals I commuted to Histon every day - a one-hour journey each way, frequently much longer when traffic was heavy. I decided to spend some of that dead time learning a foreign language from CDs, and since we'd had several skiing holidays in Italy (see ~sid:Skiing:Skiing) I figured Italian would be the best choice. This turned out to be one of those arbitrary decisions upon which our entire futures took a different course.

I eventually decided that an hour or more each way was taking up too much of my life. Since Frances was not fully committed to the Wymondham house we decided to move again, this time to rent a house near Histon from where I could cycle to work. So we packed up our house in a fleet of small vans and shipped it all to Histon.

Links: ~select:-:Select a subject!selected disabled hidden|T-Penge:Penge|T-Brentwood:Brentwood|T-Felixstowe:Felixstowe|T-North Walsham:North Walsham|T-Cambridge:Cambridge|T-Italy1:Italy|T-Leeds1:Leeds~~space:3~Next: ~tid:Cambridge:Cambridge~
